[ASP-5608] Update documentation to include latest modifications (#405)
omnivector-solutions/license-manager: docs/src/architecture.md

# License Manager Architecture

> `License Manager` works in a client/server architecture, where the main components are the `Agent`, the `API` and the `CLI`.

Reviewer: I think putting these highlighted words in italic is better for readability.
```suggestion
*License Manager* works in a client/server architecture, where the main components are the *Agent*, the *API* and the *CLI*.
```

Author: Changed it.

> `License Manager` works in a client/server architecture, where the main components are the `Agent`, the `API` and the `CLI`.

Reviewer: I think it's good to have a subsection here named `Overview` or similar.

Author: Done!

The `License Manager Agent` is the component that syncs the local `Slurm` license counters with the License Server data.

> It's also responsible for making `Booking` requests to the License Manager API when a job is submitted to Slurm.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The *License Manager Agent* is the component that syncs the local Slurm license counters with the license server data.
It's also responsible for making `Booking` requests to the *License Manager API* when a job is submitted to Slurm.
```

Author: License Server and Bookings are capitalized and highlighted because it's fundamental entities in the project.

`The License Manager API` provides a `RESTful API` where license usage and `Bookings` are tracked. The `License Manager Agent` uses this `API`

> to store the license usage information and to process the `Booking` requests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The *License Manager API* provides a *RESTful API* where license usage and bookings are tracked. The *License Manager Agent* uses this API
to store the license usage information and to process the `Booking` requests.
```

Author: Changed some of it, what do you think?

> The `License Manager CLI` is an interface to interact with the `API` to add new license configurations and to check the usage information for each tracked license.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The *License Manager CLI* provides an interface for managing license configurations and retrieving usage information for tracked licenses via the API.
```

Author: Changed it.

## License Manager Agent

> `License Manager` is used to ensure that when a job is executed, there are enough free licenses for it to succeed. The `License Manager Agent` is the component that makes it possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The *License Manager Agent* is the key component that ensures jobs have enough free licenses to execute successfully. Deployed on the cluster, this agent works in conjunction with the *License Manager API* to track license usage and prevent job failures due to insufficient licenses.
```

Author: Changed it.

The agent has two main functionalities:

* Sync the local `Slurm` license counters with the usage from the `License Server`

> * Manage the license requests from jobs submitted to the cluster using `Bookings`.

Reviewer: So, despite the sentences are clear enough, I feel they could be improved somehow to be more "dumb friendly" (I'm one regarding the license manager architecture, that's why I say that)

Author: These two topics are explained in detail in the following sections, do you think it's worth getting into detail here, since there's a section just for it later?

Reviewer: that makes sense, it is not worthy

> Since the `Slurm` license counter doesn’t interact with the `License Servers`, `License Manager Agent` polls the data from the `License Servers` and updates the counters in `Slurm`.
> Each cluster managed by `License Manager` has its own license counter linked to the `License Server`, enabling license sharing among clusters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because the Slurm license counter doesn't directly interact with *License Servers*, the *License Manager Agent* actively polls the servers for data. It then updates the corresponding counters in Slurm. Each cluster managed by *License Manager* has a dedicated license counter linked to the *License Server*. This configuration allows for license sharing across multiple clusters.
```

Author: Changed it.

# License Manager Architecture

## Overview

> *License Manager* works in a client/server architecture, where the main components are the *Agent*, the *API* and the *CLI*.

Reviewer 2: Can we look into using bold here instead of italics? I think it might look better in the docs:

```suggestion
**License Manager** works in a client/server architecture, where the main components are the **Agent**, the **API** and the **CLI**.
```

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/635184a0-72c2-4e61-a79a-d5c4fd114e28)

Author: I had used `monospaced` for all the highlighted words, but I changed to *italic* due to @matheushent's suggestion.
I'll convert to **bold** to see if it looks better.

Reviewer 2: I think it looks better in bold, personally.

to store the license usage information and to process the *Booking* requests.

The *License Manager CLI* provides an interface for managing license configurations and retrieving usage information for tracked licenses via the *License Manager API*.  

## License Manager Agent
The *License Manager Agent* is the key component that ensures jobs have enough free licenses to execute successfully.
Deployed on the *Slurm* cluster, this agent works in conjunction with the *License Manager API* to track license usage and prevent job failures due to insufficient licenses.  

The agent has two main functionalities:

* Sync the local *Slurm* license counters with the usage from the *License Server*

* Manage the license requests from jobs submitted to the cluster using *Bookings*

Since the *Slurm* license counter doesn't directly interact with *License Servers*, the *License Manager Agent* actively polls the servers for data. Then it updates the corresponding counters in *Slurm*.
Each cluster managed by *License Manager* has a dedicated license counter linked to the *License Server*. This configuration allows for license sharing across multiple clusters.  

### Bookings

> *License Manager* provides custom scripts for *SlurmctldProlog* and *SlurmctldEpilog*, executed when a job is submitted and when it finishes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
*License Manager* provides custom scripts for *SlurmctldProlog* and *SlurmctldEpilog* that are executed when a job is submitted and when it finishes.
```

Author: Changed it.

> Each job submitted to Slurm that has the *license flag* will trigger the *PrologSlurmctld* script that makes a request to the *License Manager API*

Reviewer 2: What is the "license flag"? I think this should be explained more. Maybe phrase it so that it clearly indicates that this is an sbatch option set at job submission time or something.

Author: Added more context to this paragraph.

> to create a *Booking* for the needed licenses prior to the allocation of the job. The *Booking* ensures that the licenses are available for the job

Reviewer 2: The first sentence is too long. It needs to be broken up.

```suggestion
Each job submitted to Slurm that has the *license flag* will trigger the *PrologSlurmctld* script. This script makes a request to the *License Manager API*
to create a *Booking*. The booking reserves the needed licenses prior to the allocation of the job. The *Booking* ensures that the licenses are available for the job
```

Author: Done!

to use by taking into consideration the licenses booked for other jobs and the license usage in the License Server.

If the *Booking* cannot be made, the job will be kept in the queue until there are enough licenses available to satisfy the *Booking* request.

To calculate if the license is available for use, the formula used is:

```
available = licenses booked + licenses used in License Server + licenses requested by job < total amount of licenses

> ```

Reviewer 2: This formula needs to be presented in a different way, because it will run off the page and have a horizontal scrollbar if the window is narrow enough.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/cde7a389-da85-40b5-9d96-d950ebf39406)

Author: Is this better?

<img width="620" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/adb4b423-2002-4730-a9fe-9148516dc899">

Reviewer 2: Lots better! that's great!

The *Booking* will live until one of the following conditions are met:

1. When the *grace time* expires (defaults to 5 minutes, but can be configured)

2. When *License Manager* identifies that the license was already checked out

3. When the job finishes running

The *SlurmctldEpilog* script is responsible for deleting the *Booking* when the job finishes if it’s still in the *API*.

> The other conditions are checked by the *Reconciliation*.

Reviewer 2: I feel like the three points here need to be contextualized a little bit with more information:
```suggestion
1. When the *grace time* expires (defaults to 5 minutes, but can be configured)
   The *grace time* defaults to 5 minutes, but it can be configured by... Grace
   time expiration is checked by the *reconcilliation* process
   
2. When *License Manager* identifies that the license was already checked out
   <Explain briefly what you mean by checked out>. The *reconcilliation* process
   identifies licenses that were checked out.
   
3. When the job finishes running
   The SlurmctldEpilog script is executed when a job finishes. This script will
   delete the booking if the API is still tracking the booking.
```

Author: Changed it.

Reviewer 2: Hmm...is it possible to indent the explainer text so that it's clear it's an explanation for the 3 conditions? I think it would help clarify things.

Author: Something like this?

<img width="725" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/6d0f2884-58fd-4a00-b87d-0478d2f842da">

#### Deleting Bookings by Grace Time

> A job can take some time to check out the license from the *License Server* after it is submitted to *Slurm*.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Depending on the HPC application used by a job, it may take some time to check out the license from the *License Server* after it is submitted to *Slurm*. <Add a brief explanation of why>
```

Author: Changed it.

Thus, each license has a *grace time* period that is used to indicate how long a *Booking* will be retained.
After the *grace time* expires, the *Booking* is deleted. This means that the license was checked out from the

> *License Server* and doesn't need a *Booking* anymore.

Reviewer 2: I think there needs to be a little more explanation here about the grace time corresponding to the maximum time we expect a given job to delay before checking out the license. Then we can explain a little better why the booking is being deleted after the grace time expires.

Author: Added more context to it.

#### Deleting Bookings by matching

> The output from each *License Server* supported by *License Manager* has two main sections:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
*License Manager* parses output from each *License Server* to gather information into two main sections:
```

Author: Changed it.

* License information: *Used* and *Total* counters
* Usage: how many licenses each *User* is using and the *Lead Host* from where the request was made

The *Booking* from *License Manager* contains the same information as the usage section.

If there’s a match between a *Booking* and a *usage line* from the *License Server*, the *Booking* is deleted even if the *Grace Time* is not expired yet.
This prevents double booking the license, since License Manager would take into account the *Booking* and the usage when updating the total amount of licenses used.

### Reconciliation
For each license tracked by *License Manager*, the *License Manager Agent* will periodically poll the *License Servers* to get

> the usage information and store it in the *License Manager API*. The *stat-interval* is the period of time

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the usage information and store it in the *License Manager API*. This process is called *reconciliation*. The *stat-interval* is the period of time
```

Author: Changed it.

between each Reconciliation and can be configured in the *License Manager Agent* configuration file.

The *Reconciliation* is also triggered when the *SlurmctldProlog* and *SlurmctldEpilog* run.

The information in the *License Manager API* is used by the *Reconciliation* process to update the license counters in *Slurm*.

#### Slurm License Counters
The license counter in *Slurm* shows the total number of licenses, how many are in use, and how many are reserved.

> The counter for licenses in use only accounts for licenses being used by jobs running in the cluster and can’t be edited manually.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The counter for licenses-in-use only accounts for licenses being used by jobs running in the cluster and can’t be edited manually.
```

Author: Changed it.

The licenses can be used anywhere, such as other clusters and desktop applications sharing the same license pool, so the *Reconciliation*
syncs the counters in the cluster with the values in the *License Servers* to account for usage in other environments.

> The main issue is that the *Used* counter is a read-only value.

Reviewer 2: Perhaps explain why the used counter being read-only is an issue.

Author: Added more context to it.

#### Slurm Reservation
*Slurm* has the ability to reserve resources to be used by specific users. This can also be used to block resource usage during maintenance downtime, for example.

Due to the *Slurm* counters being immutable, *License Manager Agent* uses this feature to block the licenses that are already in use
in the *License Server*, which can be used in any environment. 

> The *Reservation* mechanism should not be confused with the *Booking* created by the *SlurmctldProlog* in the *API*.

Reviewer 2: It would be good to draw a contrast between what a reservation is versus a booking. I know you've explained both by now, but it would be good to draw further _contrast_ to help the reader out.

Author: Added more context to it.

To calculate the number of licenses reserved, the following formula is used:

```

> reserved = licenses used in License Server - licenses used by Slurm + licenses booked

Reviewer 2: Again, we need to find another way to present the formulas so we don't get the nasty horizontal scrollbar.

Perhaps you could use one of the two supported "Math" libraries that mkdocs-material supports? https://squidfunk.github.io/mkdocs-material/reference/math/

Author: I updated the formulas to use the suggested module, it looks better now.

```

This *Reservation* is not meant to be consumed by users nor jobs; it's only a representation of the licenses in use.

The *Reservation* is created by the user configured in the *License Manager Agent* configuration file. The user must
have a user account in the *Slurm* cluster and have *operator* privilege level to manage *Reservations*.

### License Manager Agent Workflow
Sequence diagram for the timed *Reconciliation*:

``` mermaid
    sequenceDiagram
        participant Slurm
        participant Reconciliation
        participant LicenseServer as License Server
        participant LMAPI as LM API

        %% Sequence begins
        Slurm->>Reconciliation: Timed Reconciliation
        Reconciliation->>LicenseServer: Access License Server
        LicenseServer-->>Reconciliation: Get updated counters
        Reconciliation->>LMAPI: Update API counters
        Reconciliation->>LMAPI: Clean Bookings by grace time and matching
        LMAPI-->>Reconciliation: Get new counters with Bookings deleted
        Reconciliation-->>Slurm: Update Reservation with license usage

> ```

Reviewer 2: These are excellent!

        Reconciliation->>Slurm: Update Reservation with license usage

        %% Job checks out the license
        Slurm->>LicenseServer: Job checks out the license
        Slurm->>Reconciliation: Timed Reconciliation
        Reconciliation->>LicenseServer: Access License Server
        LicenseServer-->>Reconciliation: Get updated counters
        Reconciliation->>LMAPI: Clean Bookings by grace time and matching
        LMAPI-->>Reconciliation: Delete Booking (matched with a checked-out license)
        Reconciliation->>Slurm: Update Reservation with license usage
```

## License Manager API
The *License Manager API* provides a *RESTful API* where licenses and bookings are tracked.
The *License Manager Agent* uses this API to store the license usage information and to process the *Booking* requests.
The *License Manager CLI* interacts with this API to add new configurations and to check the usage information for each tracked license.

The *License Manager API* is also responsible for verifying if the *Booking* requests can be satisfied by accounting for *Bookings* already
made and the license usage in the *License Server*.

> The *License Manager API* contains 6 entities that have relationship among them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The *License Manager API* contains 6 distinct entities with interconnecting relationships.
```

Author: Updated it.

```
        
### Configurations

> The *Configuration* resource holds the information for a set of *Features* that are available on the same *License Server*.

Reviewer 2: You called it an _entity_ above, and here you are using _resource_. We need to consistently use one term.

Author: Changed it to `resources`.

> A *Configuration* is attached to a cluster and can have *n* *Features* attached to it.

Reviewer 2: We need to explain what we mean by a configuration being attached to a cluster, since there is no "cluster" entity. Thus, we should use a different term when talking about the relationship between a configuration and a cluster versus a configuration and a feature.

Author: Improved this part.

It also defines the license type, the *License Server* host addresses and the *grace time* period.
The license type identifies the provider of the *License Server*.

The following *License Server types* are supported:

* FlexLM
* RLM
* LS-Dyna
* LM-X
* OLicense
* DSLS

> Endpoints available:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following endpoints are available to interact with configurations:
```

Reviewer 2: We should also generate reference documentation in the same way we do for Jobbergate: https://omnivector-solutions.github.io/jobbergate/reference/api/

Reviewer 2: If we do this, you probably don't need to itemize the endpoints here or provide payload examples. Instead, this page could just refer the reader to the API docs.

Author: I'm working on adding the reference.

### Features
The *Feature* resource represents the licenses in the cluster.

Each *Feature* is attached to a *Configuration* and a *Product*.

The feature has a *reserved* value, that represents how many licenses should be reserved for usage in desktop applications.
The amount of licenses reserved is not used by the cluster.

The *License Manager Agent* polls the *License Server* to populate the *used* and *total* values.
The information stored includes the total number of licenses available and how many licenses are in use.

Endpoints available:

* POST `/lm/features`

> * POST `lm/features/bulk`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* POST `/lm/features/bulk`
```

Author: I decided to remove the endpoint listing in this section to use the reference.

* GET `/lm/features`
* GET `/lm/features/{id}`
* PUT `/lm/features/{id}`
* PUT `/lm/features/by_client_id`
* DEL `/lm/features/{id}`

The endpoint *by_client_id* extracts the *cluster_client_id* from the request and updates the feature for that cluster.

This endpoint is needed since there can be multiple licenses with the same name in different clusters.

> The endpoint *bulk* is used by the *License Manager Agent* to update the counters for multiple features with the same request.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The */lm/features/bulk* endpoint is used by the *License Manager Agent* to update the counters for multiple features with the same request.
```

Author: Updated it.

}
```

### Permissions
The *License Manager API* needs an authentication provider (OIDC) to manage the permissions for the users.

We recommend using the *Keycloak* as the OIDC provider, but any provider that supports the *OIDC* protocol can be used.

Each endpoint is protected using [Armasec](https://github.com/omnivector-solutions/armasec), which manages the permissions

> needed to access each endpoint. The permissions must be available as a claim in the JWT token.

Reviewer 2: Perhaps mention that there are guides for getting started with Keycloak (or Auth0) in the Armasec docs.

Author: Updated this section.
